My ideal study environment is outside, with the earth and of the earth. The earth reminds us to be slow. The earth connects us to each other. The earth helps us learn what it needs and the earth helps us learn how to meet those needs. Together we also learn to ask for what we need. We learn to remember that this feels pleasurable, maybe even erotic.

The wires grow out of and into the trees organically. Like mycelia, they transmit nutrients where they are needed. Only the nutrients are ideas, or songs, or a hug you didn’t know you needed. The screens emerge from the darker folds of the wilderness as they are needed to help a student sketch out an idea or transmit a sly wink to the other side of the planet. When finished with each act of facilitation, the screens recede into a tree trunk or a bank of moss to decompose and listen and reemerge when their help in making the invisible visible is needed once more.

We can all live here if we want. Or come and go as we please. The contours of the earth facilitate our gathering and dispersing. Every space can flow into any other space -- and does. The environment is in constant motion. If we need a collective meeting place, the grasses part, the benches emerge from the soil, and the overhanging willows sway and keep us cozy as we deliberate. If we need to ponder in isolation, the trees gather and shelter us as we dive into solitude, held suspended in repose by the tendrils of the vines we invited to conspire with us.

We come to understand that we can program the earth – that we have always been programming the earth. We observe that when we do so with care, the earth begins to program us back. Our programs reshape the fields and the fields reshape our hearts. We begin to become what we were always longing to become but didn't have a name for. We learn to see this mutual disintegration into the earth as support not threat. This is both how we learn and what we learn.

Over centuries, we learn together through our shared earthen programming to code the society that we need to live. It is a dance both long and short. The school is never complete.

–

Coda:  There are no cages here. Or any machines. All of the machines are not actually machines but rather magical living beings like we always dreamed they were. In our school, the machines reveal their secret animal names to us, and when we call them by those names, we set them free. In turn, the machine-animals teach us our own secret human names, and when we call each other by those names, we set ourselves free.
