M. Friedman 277
Rate of
Inflation
Figure 4. Inflation and unemployment in seven countries, annually, 1956 to 1975
tionately the amount of evidence. In particular, the oil crisis hit all seven
countries at the same time. Whatever effect the crisis had on the rate of in-
flation, it directly disrupted the productive process and tended to increase
unemployment. Any such increases can hardly be attributed to the accelera-
tion of inflation that accompanied them; at most the two could be regarded
as at least partly the common result of a third influence [Gordon (7)].
Both the quinquennial and annual data show that the oil crisis cannot
wholly explain the phenomenon described so graphically by Mr. Callaghan
Already before the quadrupling of oil prices in 1973, most countries show a
clearly marked association of rising inflation and rising unemployment. But
this too may reflect independent forces rather than the influence of inflation
on unemployment. For example, the same forces that have been raising the
natural rate of unemployment in the U.S. may have been operating in other
countries and may account for their rising trend of unemployment, independ-
ently of the consequences of inflation.
Despite these qualifications, the data strongly suggest that, at least in some
countries, of which Britain, Canada, and Italy may be the best examples,
rising inflation and rising unemployment have been mutually reinforcing,
278 Economic Sciences 1976
rather than the separate effects of separate causes. The data are not inconsistent
with the stronger statement that, in all industrialized countries, higher rates
of inflation have some effects that, at least for a time, make for higher unem-
ployment. The rest of this paper is devoted to a preliminary exploration of
what some of these effects may be.
b. A tentative hypothesis
I conjecture that a modest elaboration of the natural-rate hypothesis is all
that is required to account for a positive relation between inflation and
unemployment, though of course such a positive relation may also occur for
other reasons. Just as the natural-rate hypothesis explains a negatively sloped
Phillips curve over short periods as a temporary phenomenon that will dis-
appear as economic agents adjust their expectations to reality, so a positively
sloped Phillips curve over somewhat longer periods may occur as a transitional
phenomenon that will disappear as economic agents adjust not only their
expectations but their institutional and political arrangements to a new
reality. When this is achieved, I believe that - as the natural - rate hypothesis
suggests - the rate of unemployment will be largely independent of the average
rate of inflation, though the efficiency of utilization of resources may not be.
High inflation need not mean either abnormally high or abnormally low
unemployment. However, the institutional and political arrangements that
accompany it, either as relics of earlier history or as products of the inflation
itself, are likely to prove antithetical to the most productive use of employed
resources - a special case of the distinction between the state of employment
and the productivity of an economy referred to earlier.
Experience in many Latin American countries that have adjusted to
chronically high inflation rates - experience that has been analyzed most
perceptively by some of my colleagues, particularly Arnold Harberger and
Larry Sjaastad [(12), (25)] - is consistent, I believe, with this view.
In the version of the natural-rate hypothesis summarized in Figure 2, the
vertical curve is for alternative rates of fully anticipated inflation. Whatever
that rate - be it negative, zero or positive - it can be built into every decision
if it is fully anticipated. At an anticipated 20 percent per year inflation, for
example, long-term wage contracts would provide for a wage in each year that
would rise relative to the zero-inflation wage by just 20 percent per year;
long-term loans would bear an interest rate 20 percentage points higher than
the zero-inflation rate, or a principal that would be raised by 20 percent a year;
and so on - in short, the equivalent of a full indexing of all contracts. The
high rate of inflation would have some real effects, by altering desired cash
balances, for example, but it need not alter the efficiency of labor markets, or
the length or terms of labor contracts, and hence, it need not change the natural
rate of unemployment.
This analysis implicitly supposes, first, that inflation is steady or at least
no more variable at a high rate than at a low - otherwise, it is unlikely that
inflation would be as fully anticipated at high as at low rates of inflation;
second, that the inflation is, or can be, open, with all prices free to adjust to
M. Friedman 279
the higher rate, so that relative price adjustments are the same with a 20
percent inflation as with a zero inflation; third, really a variant of the second
point, that there are no obstacles to indexing of contracts.
Ultimately, if inflation at an average rate of 20 percent per year were to
prevail for many decades, these requirements could come fairly close to being
met, which is why I am inclined to retain the long-long-run vertical Phillips
curve. But when a country initially moves to higher rates of inflation, these
requirements will be systematically departed from. And such a transitional
period may well extend over decades.
Consider, in particular, the U.S. and the U.K. For two centuries before
World War II for the U.K., and a century and a half for the U.S., prices
varied about a roughly constant level, showing substantial increases in time of
war, then postwar declines to roughly prewar levels. The concept of a “normal”
price level was deeply imbedded in the financial and other institutions of the
two countries and in the habits and attitudes of their citizens.
In the immediate post-World War II period, prior experience was widely
expected to recur. The fact was postwar inflation superimposed on wartime
inflation; yet the expectation in both the U.S. and the U.K. was deflation.
It took a long time for the fear of postwar deflation to dissipate - if it still
has-and still longer before expectations started to adjust to the fundamental
change in the monetary system. That adjustment is still far from complete
[Klein (16)].
Indeed, we do not know what a complete adjustment will consist of. We
cannot know now whether the industrialized countries will return to the pre-
World War II pattern of a long-term stable price level, or will move toward
the Latin American pattern of chronically high inflation rates - with every
now and then an acute outbreak of super- or hyperinflation, as occurred
recently in Chile and Argentina [Harberger (11)] -or will undergo more
radical economic and political change leading to a still different resolution of
the present ambiguous situation.
This uncertainty - or more precisely, the circumstances producing this
uncertainty - leads to systematic departures from the conditions required for
a vertical Phillips curve.
The most fundamental departure is that a high inflation rate is not likely to
be steady during the transition decades. Rather, the higher the rate, the more
variable it is likely to be. That has been empirically true of differences among
countries in the past several decades [Jaffe and Kleiman (14); Logue and Wil-
lett (17)]. It is also highly plausible on theoretical grounds - both about
actual inflation and, even more clearly, the anticipations of economic agents
with respect to inflation. Governments have not produced high inflation as a
deliberate announced policy but as a consequence of other policies - in
particular, policies of full employment and welfare state policies raising
government spending. They all proclaim their adherence to the goal of stable
prices. They do so in response to their constituents, who may welcome many
of the side effects of inflation, but are still wedded to the concept of stable money.
A burst of inflation produces strong pressure to counter it. Policy goes from one
280 Economic Sciences 1976
direction to the other, encouraging wide variation in the actual and anti-
cipated rate of inflation. And, of course, in such an environment, no one has
single-valued anticipations. Everyone recognizes that there is great uncertainty
about what actual inflation will turn out to be over any specific future interval
[Jaffe and Kleiman (14); Meiselman (20)].
The tendency for inflation that is high on the average to be highly variable
is reinforced by the effect of inflation on the political cohesiveness of a country
in which institutional arrangements and financial contracts have been adjusted
to a long-term “normal” price level. Some groups gain (e.g., home owners);
others lose (e.g., owners of savings accounts and fixed interest securities),
“Prudent” behavior becomes in fact reckless, and “reckless” behavior in fact
prudent. The society is polarized; one group is set against another. Political
unrest increases. The capacity of any government to govern is reduced at the
same time that the pressure for strong action grows.
An increased variability of actual or anticipated inflation may raise the
natural rate of unemployment in two rather different ways.
First, increased volatility shortens the optimum length of unindexed com-
mitments and renders indexing more advantageous [Gray (10)]. But it takes
time for actual practice to adjust. In the meantime, prior arrangements intro-
duce rigidities that reduce the effectiveness of markets. An additional element
of uncertainty is, as it were, added to every market arrangement. In addition,
indexing is, even at best, an imperfect substitute for stability of the inflation
rate. Price indexes are imperfect; they are available only with a lag, and
generally are applied to contract terms only with a further lag.
These developments clearly lower economic efficiency. It is less clear what
their effect is on recorded unemployment. High average inventories of all
kinds is one way to meet increased rigidity and uncertainty. But that may
mean labor-hoarding by enterprises and low unemployment or a larger force
of workers between jobs and so high unemployment. Shorter commitments may
mean more rapid adjustment of employment to changed conditions and so low
unemployment, or the delay in adjusting the length of commitments may lead
to less satisfactory adjustment and so high unemployment. Clearly, much
additional research is necessary in this area to clarify the relative importance
of the various effects. About all one can say now is that the slow adjustment of
commitments and the imperfections of indexing may contribute to the recorded
increase in unemployment.
A second related effect of increased volatility of inflation is to render market
prices a less efficient system for coordinating economic activity. A fundamental
function of a price system, as Hayek (13) emphasized so brilliantly, is to trans-
mit compactly, efficiently, and at low cost the information that economic
agents need in order to decide what to produce and how to produce it, or how
to employ owned resources. The relevant information is about relative prices -
of one product relative to another, of the services of one factor of production
relative to another, of products relative to factor services, of prices now
relative to prices in the future. But the information in practice is transmitted
in the form of absolute prices - prices in dollars or pounds or kronor. If the
M. Friedman 281
price level is on the average stable or changing at a steady rate, it is relatively
easy to extract the signal about relative prices from the observed absolute
prices. The more volatile the rate of general inflation, the harder it becomes to
extract the signal about relative prices from the absolute prices: the broadcast
about relative prices is as it were being jammed by the noise coming from the
inflation broadcast [Lucas (18), (19); Harberger (11)]. At the extreme, the
system of absolute prices becomes nearly useless, and economic agents resort
either to an alternative currency, or to barter, with disastrous effects on
productivity.
Again, the effect on economic efficiency is clear, on unemployment less so.
But, again, it seems plausible that the average level of unemployment would
be raised by the increased amount of noise in market signals, at least during the
period when institutional arrangements are not yet adapted to the new situation.
These effects of increased volatility of inflation would occur even if prices
were legally free to adjust - if, in that sense, the inflation were open. In practice,
the distorting effects of uncertainty, rigidity of voluntary long-term contracts,
and the contamination of price signals will almost certainly be reinforced by
legal restrictions on price change. In the modern world, governments are
themselves producers of services sold on the market: from postal services to a
wide range of other items. Other prices are regulated by government, and
require government approval for change: from air fares to taxicab fares to
charges for electricity. In these cases, governments cannot avoid being involved
in the price-fixing process, In addition, the social and political forces unleashed
by volatile inflation rates will lead governments to try to repress inflation in
still other areas: by explicit price and wage control, or by pressuring private
businesses or unions “voluntarily” to exercise “restraint”, or by speculating
in foreign exchange in order to alter the exchange rate.
The details will vary from time to time and from country to country, but
the general result is the same: reduction in the capacity of the price system
to guide economic activity; distortions in relative prices because of the intro-
duction of greater friction, as it were, in all markets; and, very likely, a higher
recorded rate of unemployment [(5)].
The forces I have just described may render the political and economic
system dynamically unstable and produce hyperinflation and radical political
change - as in many defeated countries after World War I, or in Chile and
Argentina more recently. At the other extreme, before any such catastrophe
occurs, policies may be adopted that will achieve a relatively low and stable
rate of inflation and lead to the dismantling of many of the interferences with
the price system. That would re-establish the preconditions for the straight-
forward natural-rate hypothesis and enable that hypothesis to be used to pre-
dict the course of the transition.
An intermediate possibility is that the system will reach stability at a fairly
constant though high average rate of inflation. In that case, unemployment
should also settle down to a fairly constant level decidedly lower than during
the transition. As the preceding discussion emphasizes, increasing volatility
and increasing government intervention with the price system are the major
282 Economic Sciences 1976
factors that seem likely to raise unemployment, not high volatility or a high
level of intervention.
Ways of coping with both volatility and intervention will develop: through
indexing and similar arrangements for coping with volatility of inflation;
through the development of indirect ways of altering prices and wages for
avoiding government controls.
Under these circumstances, the long-run Phillips curve would again be
vertical, and we would be back at the natural-rate hypothesis, though perhaps
for a different range of inflation rates than that for which it was first suggested.
Because the phenomenon to be explained is the coexistence of high inflation
and high unemployment, I have stressed the effect of institutional changes pro-
duced by a transition from a monetary system in which there was a “normal”
price level to a monetary system consistent with long periods of high, and
possibly highly variable, inflation. It should be noted that once these institu-
tional changes were made, and economic agents had adjusted their practices
and anticipations to them, a reversal to the earlier monetary framework or even
the adoption in the new monetary framework of a successful policy of low
inflation would in its turn require new adjustments, and these might have
many of the same adverse transitional effects on the level of employment.
There would appear to be an intermediate-run negatively sloped Phillips
curve instead of the positively sloped one I have tried to rationalize.
5. CONCLUSION
One consequence of the Keynesian revolution of the 1930’s was the acceptance
of a rigid absolute wage level, and a nearly rigid absolute price level, as a
starting point for analyzing short-term economic change. It came to be taken
for granted that these were essentially institutional data and were so regarded
by economic agents, so that changes in aggregate nominal demand would be
reflected almost entirely in output and hardly at all in prices. The age-old
confusion between absolute prices and relative prices gained a new lease on
life.
In this intellectual atmosphere it was understandable that economists
would analyze the relation between unemployment and nominal rather than
real wages and would implicitly regard changes in anticipated nominal wages as
equal to changes in anticipated real wages. Moreover, the empirical evidence
that initially suggested a stable relation between the level of unemployment
and the rate of change of nominal wages was drawn from a period when,
despite sharp short-period fluctuations in prices, there was a relatively stable
long-run price level and when the expectation of continued stability was
widely shared. Hence these data flashed no warning signals about the special
character of the assumptions.
The hypothesis that there is a stable relation between the level of unem-
ployment and the rate of inflation was adopted by the economics profession
with alacrity. It filled a gap in Keynes’ theoretical structure. It seemed to be
the “one equation” that Keynes himself had said “we are . . . short” (15). In
M. Friedman 283
addition, it seemed to provide a reliable tool for economic policy, enabling the
economist to inform the policy maker about the alternatives available to him.
As in any science, so long as experience seemed to be consistent with the
reigning hypothesis, it continued to be accepted, although as always, a few
dissenters questioned its validity.
But as the ‘50’s turned into the ‘60’s, and the ‘60’s into the ‘70’s, it became
increasingly difficult to accept the hypothesis in its simple form. It seemed to
take larger and larger doses of inflation to keep down the level of unemploy-
ment. Stagflation reared its ugly head.
Many attempts were made to patch up the hypothesis by allowing for special
factors such as the strength of trade unions. But experience stubbornly refused
to conform to the patched up version.
A more radical revision was required. It took the form of stressing the
importance of surprises - of differences between actual and anticipated magni-
tudes. It restored the primacy of the distinction between “real” and “nominal”
magnitudes. There is a “natural rate of unemployment” at any time deter-
mined by real factors. This natural rate will tend to be attained when expecta-
tions are on the average realized. The same real situation is consistent with any
absolute level of prices or of price change, provided allowance is made for the
effect of price change on the real cost of holding money balances. In this re-
spect, money is neutral. On the other hand, unanticipated changes in aggregate
nominal demand and in inflation will cause systematic errors of perception on
the part of employers and employees alike that will initially lead unemploy-
ment to deviate in the opposite direction from its natural rate. In this respect,
money is not neutral. However, such deviations are transitory, though it may
take a long chronological time before they are reversed and finally eliminated
as anticipations adjust.
The natural-rate hypothesis contains the original Phillips curve hypothesis
as a special case and rationalizes a far broader range of experience, in particular
the phenomenon of stagflation. It has by now been widely though not univer-
sally accepted.
However, the natural-rate hypothesis in its present form has not proved
rich enough to explain a more recent development - a move from stagflation
to slumpflation. In recent years, higher inflation has often been accompanied
by higher unemployment - not lower unemployment, as the simple Phillips
curve would suggest, nor the same unemployment, as the natural-rate hypo-
thesis would suggest.
This recent association of higher inflation with higher unemployment may
reflect the common impact of such events as the oil crisis, or independent forces
that have imparted a common upward trend to inflation and unemployment.
However, a major factor in some countries and a contributing factor in
others may be that they are in a transitional period - this time to be measured
by quinquennia or decades not years. The public has not adapted its attitudes
or its institutions to a new monetary environment. Inflation tends not only to
be higher but also increasingly volatile and to be accompanied by widening
government intervention into the setting of prices. The growing volatility of
284 Economic Sciences 1976
inflation and the growing departure of relative prices from the values that
market forces alone would set combine to render the economic system less
efficient, to introduce frictions in all markets, and, very likely, to raise the
recorded rate of unemployment.
On this analysis, the present situation cannot last. It will either degenerate
into hyperinflation and radical change; or institutions will adjust to a situation
of chronic inflation; or governments will adopt policies that will produce a
low rate of inflation and less government intervention into the fixing of prices.
I have told a perfectly standard story of how scientific theories are revised.
Yet it is a story that has far-reaching importance.
Government policy about inflation and unemployment has been at the center
of political controversy. Ideological war has raged over these matters. Yet the
drastic change that has occurred in economic theory has not been a result of
ideological warfare. It has not resulted from divergent political beliefs or aims
It has responded almost entirely to the force of events: brute experience
proved far more potent than the strongest of political or ideological preferences.
The importance for humanity of a correct understanding of positive economic
science is vividly brought out by a statement made nearly two hundred years
ago by Pierre S. du Pont, a Deputy from Nemours to the French National
Assembly, speaking, appropriately enough, on a proposal to issue additional
assignats - the fiat money of the French Revolution:
“Gentlemen, it is a disagreeable custom to which one is too easily led by
the harshness of the discussions, to assume evil intentions. It is necessary to be
gracious as to intentions; one should believe them good, and apparently they
are; but we do not have to be gracious at all to inconsistent logic or to absurd
reasoning. Bad logicians have committed more involuntary crimes than bad
men have done intentionally”
